You'll let me know when we've got a guest.
I'm looking at a beautiful Chris. Okay.
Winston, are you there?
Pure. Hi, um, welcome
to the Regulations Review Committee. Is that Winston?
It is me indeed. This is Winston.
Thank you very much for coming along.
Um, would you mind turning on your video?
I shall try. Thank you.
Um, just while you're doing that, my name's Arina Williams.
I'm the chair of the Regulations Review Committee.
Um, we are going to give you 10 minutes to present to us,
um, about your complaint.
Would encourage you to leave five minutes if you can.
Four questions. I'm sure members would like
to engage with what you've got to say.
We can't see the video, but, um, go ahead
and just, um, make your submission orally.
Thank you. Can you see me? No, just go ahead though.
Okay. Yes. My name is Winston Marsh.
I'm a resident in Gisborne Pathy.
And I would like to thank you
for hearing me today and
I'll try and be brief.
I understand the purpose of your committee.
Um, Madam Chair is to ensure regulations that are made
by various bodies are fair, consistent,
and within the powers granted by Parliament.
And the Commerce Commission has a similar role in
that it promotes competition
to protect consumers from monopolistic trading
and predatory pricing.
So I'm here today to suggest the commission has dropped the
ball here because it's granted backdated permission
to the first flight company
to collect over a million dollars from
local gisborne y raw households and small business.
And the purpose of the payment being taken
through the electricity account is to reimburse first light.
Now owned by Cap International
for costs is incurred repairing its power lines,
the network following the cyclone known as Gabriel.
And I submit those costs apart and parcel of the rough
and tumble of running a business.
My son's horticultural land was inundated
and severely affected
and he, like the other 30,000
or so of us were without electricity for days.
And I interpolate here
that the commission had already waived the, um,
excessive time we were without power.
Can I just check? You can hear me okay?
Yes, we can hear you. Thank you.
Um, the, the daily rate charge that's in
comes from the retailer of course,
but it's for the supplier, um, that continued
and it's over a dollar a day.
Um, and so I'm submitting that all
of these costs that the company has incurred, it just part
of the rough and tumble of running that business.
And so we are actually being asked to act as insurer
for the company when in fact it should have its own
insurance and very possibly haters International does
have international, um, cover,
but who would know?
Now, the purpose, as you will know of the Commerce Act is in
for this part is set out in section 52, big A of the ACT
and is quotation marks
to promote the long term benefit
of consumers in regulated markets.
So I look at 52 A
and it says, well, I'm not going
to read you the whole section 52 A.
I'm sure you can. I'm sure that you guys know what
that's all about, but certainly 52 1D is
to limit the ability to extract excess of profits.
And, and I'll, I'll leave that section open,
but there's nothing in those purposes.
Um, in 52 a of the act
to suggest the consumers may be charged for the cost
of the impact on the income stream
of a monopoly lines company from a natural disaster.
Indeed, the words of Section 52 A
actually indicate the contrary.
Now, um,
be more specific and brief.
I would like to comment on the Gazette notice, which is,
which is, um, delegated legislation
or secondary legislation that the committee
is responsible for.
And I'm holding the Gazette notice in my hand,
and you can't see it because I haven't got my camera on.
It's an old machine,
but it's ended up, uh,
commerce Commission notification of amendment to electricity
distribution services, default path price,
Python quality Determination
20 20 20 19.
And as a reference NZ C 21 isn't short, it's an amendment
to price parameters.
Am I shouting now? No, no.
We can hear expired 31
March, 2025 gone.
And the first words of the notice are under Section 52 P,
which section purportedly cloaks the commission's authority
to introduce a catastrophic allowance
into the previously set consumer charges
as previously published in the Gisbon Herald public Notices.
So, so
I think, um, you've, um, made your point clear.
I think I'll open up now for questions from the committee.
Um, we've only got three more minutes,
um, so I'll make those brief.
Does anyone have any, okay.
Um, No.
Do you, do you want
to tell us some more information or do you want questions?
Yes, I, I really should because, um, okay.
The, the notice itself is buried into
attachment A on page seven of the
reconsideration of the default path
by the Commerce Commission for Cyclone Gabriel catastrophic
event request dated one May 25.
And the application is for relief by the company
and it says we
determine the price path under the Methodologies Act,
which is Commerce Commission's own legislation
on a Forecast X anti.
Now, what sort of words is X anti this,
this isn't very good legislation,
X hyphen anti, if it's meant to be Latin,
there are no hyphens in Latin.
Um, so it's a made up word in the regulation
and that that offends me as well,
frankly. And now I'll stop.
Fair enough. Um, thank you. Thank you.
Um, the,
I think the committee would be interested in you talking
about what effect this has on you.
How much, um, more will you pay
because of this determination?
And what does that mean for your household
As I, it depends on
how long they spread the payments out for.
Mm, mm-hmm. As I understand it, they're going
to introduce it in 2027.
Um, they, they could what they call smooth it,
and I suspect they'll be smoothing it to the extent of,
in my case, my household $6 a month.
And that's a lot of money on top of the $30 a month
that they've just hit us with in so-called Catchups,
which all of you will be aware
of from your own power accounts.
Um, do you mind my asking, uh, what other, so
that we understand relatively, what, what do you pay
for your power bill on a monthly basis now?
Two or $300.
My, my, um, treasurer Oceany,
my wife, she does that
Good on her Busy.
We've probably got time for one more short question. No.
Okay. Um, Winston, who
Are you talking to please?
It's, have I got The whole committee there?
Yes, we do have the whole committee.
I'm sorry you can't see us. We are out of time.
We, um, want to really thank you for engaging
with the committee and back
and forth correspondence, but also coming along today.
Um, if you would like to share any other information
with us, we will be in touch with you to do,
to get anything else that we need.
Am I unable to stay
and watch the Commerce Commission's presentation now?
You are welcome to sit in for ComCom.
Um, you'll be, you, uh, you won't be a panelist anymore,
so you won't be able to contribute to that.
No, but can I see and hear it?
I'm not sure what you can see, but yes.
Oh, I can see the three of you at the front. Okay.
But that's all. Yeah,
We'll be we'll be moving on camera so you can see.
Great. Okay. Um, alright, now
welcome you to the table.
Thank you.
Thanks very much. Um, Adrian, we've got 20 minutes.
Um, I'll start the time now, but, um, thank you.
Do also just wanna make sure that we Yes.
Um, good afternoon, Madam Chair and Madam Deputy Chair
and members of the Regulations Review Committee.
I'm Adrian Meko, I'm the Chief Executive
of the Commerce Commission.
Uh, I'd like to introduce you to Andy Burgess,
who's our general manager responsible for infrastructure
regulation work, including, um, electricity distribution,
service matters, and to, um, Andrew Risely,
our general counsel.
Um, sitting behind us is, uh, Rachel Coyle, one
of our principal advisors who's also been involved in
looking at this matter.
And, um, just wanted to, um, say hello to you also, Mr.
Um, Morton Hines Marsh, um, and acknowledge you are there
and I know, um, Rachel had spoken to you.
I'll pass to, um, Andy and Andrew to answer questions,
but as you wish to proceed, Madam Chair, um,
it might be really, um, contextualized for the committee,
how, why this decision was made, um,
what a normal decision making process would look like, sort
of five year period and how, um, you know,
what alternatives you had available.
Um, where we'll also have some specific questions
for you about bylaw authorization was the decision made,
but let's deal with that a little bit later.
Absolutely. Thanks very much. I'll pass over
to Andy and Andrew.
Thanks very much, Adrian.
Um, so I'll, I'll cover the, the general approach
and then I'll hand over to Andrew
to talk about the legal aspects.
Um, so our,
our focus at the commission is on the long-term interest
of consumers, and we think that having ERs like this
is consistent with that aim.
Um, I think in any,
or in in lots of economic regulatory regimes
around the world where you have a five year period within
which we set the maximum revenue that an entity can earn
and the minimum level of reliability that they have
to deliver, the, the, there has to be some sort
of change mechanisms
because certain, certain, uh,
circumstances change over that period.
And you can have severe weather events such as the cyclone,
um, that affected the East Coast.
So having ERs is a fairly normal thing
in network regulation.
And we think that having them is in the consumer interest
because, uh, say in the case for catastrophic event,
if we didn't have ERs,
and probably one of two things would happen, either
the regulated entity would price in the risk to the prices
that they charge retailers and then, and consumers
and consumers might end up paying for that risk,
even if the risk doesn't eventuate
or the regulated entity might do nothing.
And then you would have a circumstance, say with the cyclone
where reliability on the network suffers
and they wait until the next regulatory period,
the next five year period to try
to get the revenue to invest in the network.
So we think having this kind of mechanism allows us
to scrutinize the expenditure in consumer's interests
and make sure consumers get value for money.
We recognize that that unfortunately has a bill impact
for people who may already be, be struggling with the size
of their electricity bills, but we think it's more efficient
and allows us to scrutinize the expenditure in a way which
is better than the alternatives.
So we think ERs are in consumer's interest.
In the case of this reopener,
we did scrutinize the expenditure, uh,
first like commissioned an external expert
to look at the expenditure and we looked at that report, um,
and we consulted before making a final decision.
I have to say that having looked at this in
the light of a Mr.
Mr. Morton, Hein Marsh's, um, complaint, we do feel
that we could do more to bring these sort of decisions
to consumer's attention
and we think the regulated entities should be doing more.
So we, we've made a couple of changes recently, firstly, in
guidance to, uh,
electricity distribution businesses on these ERs,
we set an expectation that they will engage
with their communities before submitting to us,
and we will look at that level
of engagement in making a decision.
And then for our own consultation,
so we always consult publicly,
but we recognize that consumers aren't necessarily avid
watches of our website.
Um, we have started using social media to draw attention
to catastrophic ERs,
and so we did that in, in a recent case with unison.
So that's, I guess the policy context
where we think ERs are in consumers interest.
I'll hand over to Andrew to, to deal with the legal ethics.
Uh, thanks Andy. Uh, I think the most useful
contribution I can make is just to ensure that, um,
the committee understands the, uh, the way that the, uh,
the determinations are made under
part four of the Communist Act.
So the foundational rules
for part four regulation are in something
called the input methodologies.
And they're intended to be, uh, principles that are set,
that are, that are, that are long-term endurable.
They, they deal with things like, uh,
the weighted average cost of capital,
but also things like ERs
and they're intended as a, as a set of, of rules
that are, that are enduring.
Um, and then every five years we set under, uh, the,
um, under section 52 P of the Commerce Act, uh, uh,
a default price quality path
or where a, where a electricity business applies
for a customized price quality path.
And that's the revenue requirement
and the quality standards for, for a,
for a five year period.
Uh, the, um, I think it's important to appreciate
that the, one of the other things that the IMS do, sorry,
the input methodologies do, um, is, uh, is
prescribe how different price quality periods interrelate.
Um, so a price quality period
for five years is not a hermetically sealed box.
Um, one of the things that can happen during
that five year period is the business,
the electricity distribution,
electricity distribution business may over recover
or under recover against the revenue requirement that's in
that period, and
that there's something called the washup mechanism
that effectively pulls forward and under recovery
and over recovery and, and,
and it's recognized in the, in the following period.
Um, and because the reconciliation of that only happens
after the end of the preceding period, the, the, the, um,
the recognition of that, of that over recovery
or under recovery only happens, um, in fact in, in,
in either year two or year three of the following period.
So they're not, they're not, as I say,
hermetically sealed five years there, there's a degree
of flow of revenue that happens.
Um, what happens, um,
with the DPP is the revenue requirement
and the quality standards are reset, but, um,
but there's already, even in the absence of,
of something like a reopener, there's already quite a lot of
flow of revenue that happens from one period to the other.
Mm. Um, you'll have seen in the correspondence
to the committee from, um, from our chief exec that, um,
we say the, the effect of the, I think it's important
for the committee to appreciate that the effect of
the reopener is prospective.
So in no case is the electricity bill
that someone has already paid in a previous period reopened,
and the electricity company doesn't come
and say, right, well we've had the, we've had a cyclone
and, um, we're now gonna say that in, in, um, period X,
you should have paid more than you did that both in terms
of the revenue that the electricity distribution business
can collect and the impact on bills
that happens prospectively.
Um, got a question from Miles Anderson. I've got some.
So, um, the catastrophic event allowance,
why are so, and, and,
and, you know, first thought is one example,
but there's lots of up down the country, why so many, uh,
companies, uh, uh, over the period of the last 20 years
applying for this or, uh, carve out when, you know,
in my area, for example, I could count probably
eight catastrophic events really, that have, um,
upset them a distribution grid in the last 50 years
when they obviously, uh, they haven't regularly
and the companies don't seem
to be keeping enough retained earnings to cover that,
and they're using the consumer as the,
um, insurance.
So my question I guess is why
are we allowing that to happen?
Because I'm sure the, um,
companies will be getting somewhere between eight
and 12% return on investment for them
to retain some earnings full catastrophic bid
that regularly You want me to Yep. So if
I, if I can answer that one.
So I think on the catastrophic reopener, the
first light application is the first one since the reopener
mechanism was introduced
In 2020.
Yeah, so we've only had two applications so far.
One from firstlight
and one from Unison, both for the, the cyclone.
Um, there are other ERs which regulated entities, uh,
can apply to use.
Um, we, I mean, the reopening is called catastrophic
because it's obviously a very severe weather event,
so it's not designed to cut that just short periods
of adverse weather.
We would expect the entities to manage those
and we set minimum reliability standards,
and so we expect them to comply with those standards
and to deal with, uh, the norm if you'd like.
These three openers are for exceptional events.
Um, I think in terms of why,
say the owners shouldn't be picking up the tab for this kind
of event, I think if, if the regime worked like that,
I suspect the owners would price in the,
their take on the likelihood of one of these events.
And so consumers would pay more on an ongoing basis.
Having a reopener means
that we can look at the specific circumstances,
they don't need to price it in, we can look at it,
we can decide what's reasonable
and we can decide what represents value
for money for consumers.
So we think it, it is actually in,
in consumers better interest to have a reopener than
for the, the owners to price it in to, to the ongoing, uh,
prices that they value.
Right. So I'm guessing, so
before 2020, what was the regime like then? When
We had some ERs, I, um,
and they would cover particular circumstances,
but I think we,
we introduced the catastrophic reopener on the basis that,
you know, New Zealand does have very severe weather
events from time to time.
We felt it was necessary following consultation.
So is it harder to ensure for those companies
for this sort of thing, um, then, um,
having DISA allowance?
Yeah, so I think, I think it's quite hard to ensure,
so I'm getting this anecdotally,
but I think it's quite hard to ensure there's the
basic poles and wires.
I think bigger equipment such
as transformers can be insured, unison,
we know had some insurance
and we, we deduct the amount they're getting from insurance
from the amount that they can recover from consumers.
Uh, first flight didn't have any insurance.
Um, thank you. This has been useful. Um,
The first question is about, um,
is this the appropriate model for these lines companies
that are now privately owned?
Like we went from a model of having, you know,
a regulated price path, price quality path
for essentially community trust owned assets.
This was owned by Eastland Group.
Is this still appropriate when the group of 23
made a distribution of more than 50 million?
Um, from, from this s
So, um, the legislation basically determines whether an
entity is subject to a price pass, is if the entity is,
is con consumer owned, it's exempt from having a price pass
just subject to information disclosure.
Um, if it's not consumer owned under the legislation, it has
to be price regulated.
Um, I think sort of looking to the future,
we would like more flexibility to bring people in
and out price regulation.
Uh, and I think generally we don't think
that the ownership model dictates really
how complex an entity is
or whether it needs greater scrutiny.
It's a lot of it's to do with the circumstances
and the management of the entity.
Um, but as it stands it's all determined by legislation.
Well, um, so the information that you shared
with us about the, um,
the financial flow is obviously really relevant.
Um, but that's not necessarily how the, uh,
legislation reads.
Um, it seems like within the period, um,
that, um, you know, we've got a re regulated monopoly here
that would spend on US assets within that period
and recover within that period for that spending.
Um, this seems to have been, um,
a decision that had retrospective
that was made retrospectively
that didn't have retrospective impact,
but still doesn't seem to be duly authorized.
Where does that leave, um, the,
um, legal standing of the decision?
Well, I think we would say that it is duly authorized.
Yeah. Okay. Um, but, um, by sections
52, well by the input methodologies
I'm looking at 52 and I'm gonna need some help,
but it's quite a basic section.
Yeah. Um, so you think that
because section 52 empowers the ims,
that the IMS can essentially just say you can accommodate
the fact that there will be financial flows between
both years despite sort
of absolutely being designed in a, in a box
Here? Well,
I don't, I don't, I would say,
and I think you know, that the input methodologies have been
in place since 2012.
Yeah. Um, and they are intended to be the foundational, um,
document that kind of governs how electricity lines are,
are, are regulated on an enduring basis.
Yeah. And the fact of there being financial flows between,
um, periods has been true from the beginning.
Yeah. So, um,
Entirely makes sense to me. Yeah.
Um, and, and, and, and,
and if you think about it in a way, um, it's
unsurprising in that if you had,
if they were hermetically sealed five year periods,
the catastrophic event happened two minutes.
So, so our, so our, our period, our DPP, sorry,
default press quality periods typically start
for electricity on, on the 1st of April.
Um, so if you had an earthquake at 11:58 PM on the
31st of March, it would be odd if, if, if
that had a different treatment to an earthquake
that happened at, at 12:02 AM on the 1st of April.
So, so to a certain extent, the fact that there being
some kind of a reconciliation that you have to do
between periods is, um, I, I,
I think just an, a nature of the fact that this is a,
this is a rating that, that that's enduring.
Um, we do talk in the correspondence from the chief,
from the chief executive about the fact that, uh, the,
the, the, the reason that the reopener happened
and the way that it did was
because the input methodologies at the time when the
catastrophic event happened
effectively hemmed in the ability of our commissioners to,
um, to reopen the reopen, uh,
DPP, the, the de default price quality period, um,
in which the decision was made, um, at,
at the time the decision was made.
Yeah. Mm-hmm. So, um, we've looked at the, um,
the input methodologies actually prior
to the complaint coming in, um,
and the, the input methodologies have actually been amended
so that there is more flexibility for, for the commission
to be able to effectively reopened at the point where
the, the decision has been taken rather than
to reopen a previous period.
Yeah. That's, um, but,
but it is important to say that that whatever happens, the,
the impact on bills is prospective.
Um, and, and, um, if the
input methodologies had been structured in the way
that they are now, back then
precisely the same financial impact would've happened.
So, so there's not, so yeah.
So what advice did you give at the time on why the bills
couldn't be prospective in the new period?
Why did it have to happen in the previous period?
Because at the time when the application came in, um, and,
and the, at the time the, the application came in
and when the, the catastrophic event had happened,
our input methodologies, which we, you know, we do have
to adhere to, um, said that,
that the price quality period three couldn't be reopened
within that, within the, the window of time
that that would've been available. Yeah.
Yeah. No, my question is why wasn't your advice changed?
The amount in default price, um, period for
Yes. Be be because that
wasn't available, right? Yeah.
But you've now made that, but it is Now
it it is now, yes.
Be because the input methodologies subsequent to
that have been changed so
that they would would've allowed it. Yes. Okay.
Um, just a final question.
Um, once it's got a point about, uh, ex andante
and that sort of language
and letters that are designed for the consumption
of the public's a good, are you going to fix that in future?
Yeah. Yeah. Great. Julie,
Not, thank you.
Thank you. Um, Mr.
Warten Marsh for that insight too, Shannon.
Um, Yeah, thank you.
Um, pretty quite interesting actually,
and it's sort of, yeah, obviously relatively complex get
head around, but I think I've got my head around, uh,
in terms board methodologies
and how that sort of works with the, um, default, um, path,
um, and that it can be reopened.
What I, what I'm interested is,
and sort of was listening to
what you asked were changed just before,
but I'm still a little bit unclear.
I, when I look at, um, sections 52 1 52 T, um, how that
you, that is allowing retroactivity, um, yes, I,
I understand the policy challenge that you had.
Um, and you know,
and I understand we, it's, it's, it's a,
it's a really difficult one and we need
to have good networks and we need to have ability
to pay for that.
Mm-hmm. Um, but this, this does, you know,
any new leader, you have the knowledge
that it does have some retrospective effect,
but I'm still not quite clear in my mind how those sections,
he interpret those to enable retrospectively when it's not
specifically, um, uh, defined. Yeah. Those sections,
I don't think I, I agree.
Yep. So, so, uh, so
is the question is does
the legislation permit the I methodologies
to do this? Yeah. To do
Because we think it, perhaps it should.
Well, perhaps it should.
Well, there's the question about whether it should,
I guess in, in the sense of everything being guided by 52 A.
Yeah. Um, I suppose 52 T
talks about regulatory processes
and rules, such as, it doesn't say the only regulatory rules
and processes you can have are those.
So to a certain extent, 52 t we regard as a, as a,
as a list of things
that can appear in the input methodologies rather than an
exclusive list that says only these things can.
Um, but yeah, I, I, I think the, the, the,
the correspondence from the chief executive kind
of explains the ary that our commissioners were in, um, in
that at the particular point where the,
the catastrophic event happened,
the input methodologies only really allowed
commissioners one of two options.
And they've taken the, the and, and the input.
I, I guess the input methodologies have, have been set.
The, the commissioners,
I think understandably regard themselves as bound by them.
Um, and so they, they're ensuring
that when they make their decision
for the default price quality path, it's in accordance
with those implement methodologies.
Yeah. I, I guess I, I understand suppose
of the interpretation statutes and, and, um, and, and,
and there's some, these, the, you know,
it's a real policy logic to it.
Um, just the, the, the challenge that we will need to, um,
think through is, is, um, there's real caution
around any retrospective effective, um, any anything
unless that's specifically spelled out.
So it's, it's something we'll have to, I think,
turn our on to mm-hmm.
Yeah. Um, we might get you back to talk to us about it,
but we've got enough information I think
about the complaint.
Is there anything from legislative
council that we have missed?
No, I have everything.
Thank you. Just, just one more question.
Um, we do, we deal, we deal with this all the time.
I can't tell what the IMS are.
Are they secondary legislation? Yes. Okay.
Yes. So you'll see section 52 W Yeah.
Is the, of, of the act is the, is the provision that,
that gives rise to the power to make the, the,
um, the methodologies.
And so you'll see for, for,
for us post the legislation effect 2019,
the legislation act 2019, our, the, the, the thing we use
to, um, uh, internally
to work out whether something is ary legislation
or not, is does that box appear at the bottom of, of,
of the empowering provision and Oh, goodness. Yeah. Who,
Who was the decision maker for this piece
of secondary legislation? Who?
The Commerce Commission? The, the, yeah.
And it was a, a division
of the Commerce commission apart for division.
You'll see the names of the commissioners on the front
of the determination.
Okay. Cool. Thank you. I think we are finished. Yeah.
Thank you very much. We're moving outta public.
So Winston, we uh, um, going to, um,
move, move out of the session.